[Docs] Improve channel-list components documentation (#1967)
GetStream/stream-chat-swift: docusaurus/docs/iOS/uikit/controllers/channels.md

title: Channel Controllers
---

import SingletonNote from '../../common-content/chat-client.md'

## ChannelListController

`ChatChannelListController` is the component responsible for managing the list of channels matching the given query. The main responsibilities are:
- exposing the list of channels matching the query
- allowing to paginate the channel list (initially, only the 1st page of channels is fetched)

> - keeping the list of channels in sync with remote by dynamically linking/unlinking channels that start/stop matching the query

Author: Fixed ✅

Here is the code snippet showing how to instantiate `ChatChannelListController` showing the channels the current user is a member of:
```swift
// 1. Create a query matching channels where members contain the current user  
let query = ChannelListQuery(filter: .containMembers(userIds: [currentUserId]))

// 2. Create a controller
let controller = ChatClient.shared.channelListController(query: query, filter: { channel in
    return channel.membership != nil
})

// 3. Set the delegate
controller.delegate = delegate

// 4. Synchronize a controller
controller.synchronize { error in /* handle error */ }
```

> Let's go though step by step.

Author: Fixed ✅

<SingletonNote />

### 1. Create a query

The channel list query is described by `ChannelListQuery` type. The main parts of the query are filter and sorting options.

The `query.filter` determines a set of conditions the channel should satisfy to match the query. It can contains conditions for **built-in** channel fields:
```swift
let filter1: Filter<ChannelListFilterScope> = .equal(.type, to: .messaging)
```
as well as conditions for **custom** fields:
```swift
let filter2: Filter<ChannelListFilterScope> = .equal("state", to: "LA")
```

> Primitive filters can be **combined** using `and/or/nor` operators which allows to get a filter of any complexity:

Author: Fixed ✅

```swift
let compoundFilter: Filter<ChannelListFilterScope> = .and([
    filter1,
    filter2
])
```

> The `query.sort` is an array of sorting options. Sorting option are applied based on their order in array so the first option has the highest impact while the others are used mainly as a tiebreakers. By default, the channel list is sorted by `updated_at`.

Author: Fixed ✅

})
```

The `filter` closure is needed to dynamically link/unlink channels to the list during the controller's lifecycle to keep the list in sync with the remote:

When `filter` returns `true`, the new/updated channel is linked/stays linked to the channel list

When `filter` returns `false`, the new/updated channel is not linked/is unlinked from the channel list.

:::note
It is expected that the logic on the `filter` closure matches the one in `query.filter`.
:::

:::note
Given the complex nature of `Filter`, having generic logic capable of using `query.filter` at runtime to determine if a channel meets the criteria is extremely expensive and complex. Instead, having a block that checks for the particular needs of the use case is much cheaper.
:::

### 3. Set the delegate

An instance of the type conforming to `ChatChannelListControllerDelegate` protocol can be assigned as controller's delegate:
```swift
controller.delegate = delegate
```

:::note
An integrator should make sure to keep a strong reference to the `delegate` passed to the controller. Otherwise, the delegate object will get deallocated since the controller references it **weakly**.
:::

### 4. Synchronize controller

> The `synchronize` should be called on the controller to:
> - fetch the first page of channels matching the query
> - subscribe on events for those channels
> - setup the database observers

Reviewer: The database observers are an implementation detail of the controller, and so the customers don't know, and shouldn't know about this. What about "start observing data changes", WDYT? 
```suggestion
The `synchronize` should be called on the controller to:
- fetch the first page of channels matching the query
- subscribe to events for those channels
- start observing data changes
```

Author: Fixed ✅
